[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. [music] I'm
Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, I feel like
we're what about 10 days, 12 days into
2026. And how many emergency episodes
have we recorded so far? This is going
to be our fourth.
>> Our poor producers, you know, and they
keep happening on weekends, too, which
is not uh the big the big developments
keep happening on weekends, but I think
it's going to be a busy year for us.
>> H sad, but I am sure you are correct. I
mean from the news business perspective
there's certainly no shortage of news
flow and that can be a good thing but it
is hard to keep up nowadays as you
mentioned. So
>> I know I want to do a claw code episode.
>> When are we going to get around to that?
>> So this is the second weekend of 2026
and the news this weekend is that Fed
Chairman Jerome Pal said that the
central bank has been served with a
grand jury subpoena from the DOJ
threatening a criminal indictment. And
this has to do with the renovation of a
Federal Reserve building, which you
know, Trump has made noises about
before. Specifically, apparently the
wrongdoing for this particular
indictment or potential indictment is
that Jerome Pal might have lied when he
gave his congressional testimony back in
I think it was June of last year. But as
we said, you know, our timelines are
starting to all melt and blur into one.
But basically, this is the next big
escalation in the Trump versus Fed
fight.
>> Yes, exactly right. And I think there's
a few interesting things here. I mean,
obviously Jerome Powell is on his way
out already as Fed chair, though he
could stay on the board and that's
interesting. And now I think there's
people are thinking, well, maybe he's
going to stick around more because of
this. And then the other element too is
what I would say is like one of the most
direct statements in response. Yesterday
evening, Jerome Powell put out a video
and a statement in which he said that
this uh subpoena is really about the
administration's frustration with
interest rate policy. And of course, uh,
Paulo has been very diplomatic, uh, with
all the criticism, really not commenting
at all about, um, all of the various
critiques. We're just going to do our
job. We're going to do the job for the
American people, etc. Basically
deflecting any questions on the politics
surrounding, and this is a major break.
Our uh, our colleague Cameron K, as he
put it, this is the straw that broke the
camel's back. And he's being more direct
than almost anyone else in public
service or government, etc., and saying
this is essentially extortion, this is
intimidation, this is thug behavior and
this is not how he's talked about the
pressure in the past. Right? And if you
watch the video, I mean, Pal has uh
annoyed um grandpa that has had, you
know, enough of all of this nonsense
just written all over his face. Bad
weekend for Pal, by the way, because the
um the guitarist from his favorite band,
Grateful Dead, also died. So, you know,
not a great weekend for PAL. But
obviously, on a serious note, we need to
talk about what all of this means, how
it fits into the ongoing tensions
between the central bank and the Trump
administration. And who better, who's
the man that we always call when this
happens, and I guess it's happening more
frequently nowadays, but we always call
Lev Manand. He is of course a professor
at Columbia Law School and the author of
the Fed Unbound. So, Lev, welcome back
to the OddLotss podcast. Thanks for
coming on at short notice.
>> Thanks for having me back.
>> So, why don't we start with let's just
put this in context. I've seen a lot of
people talking about this kind of
criminal indictment or you know possible
criminal indictment as an unprecedented
escalation in terms of central bank
versus presidential tensions. I guess
how unprecedented is this? I think this
is about more even at this point than um
the central bank and central bank
independence. This is an attempt by this
administration to uh force out its
perceived political opponents from the
government. And so this is quite
unprecedented. We haven't seen anything
really quite like this even in this
administration over the past year. you
know, something analogous would be, you
know, a criminal investigation of Chuck
Schumer or Hurricane Jeff or, you know,
a Supreme Court justice. J Pal is a
senior government official and um the
administration's made quite clear uh
that it would like him to carry out his
duties differently from how he is doing
it. And now they are basically
threatening to throw him in jail if he
doesn't step down or comply. And so this
is a very very significant escalation
that is different in kind even from what
we saw over the summer where the
administration was sort of pursuing
potential removal actions against um
various members of the board including
Powell. This is a criminal investigation
which I think I think is different in
kind and and should be understood to be
a very different set of issues that go
that go well beyond the Fed itself.
>> Right? I think what's striking here is
we're talking about this in the context
of Fed independence questions, right?
Can the president remove a uh Fed chair
or a Fed governor, whatever? Can they be
fired? But this is kind of separate
because this isn't really there is this
question and this question will all get
to the Supreme Court at some point. But
this is sort of like a a sideways thing
or a parallel thing from that. This is
about accusation of a crime.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And so there are now
multiple different sort of legal
proceedings underway involving the
administration's effort to basically cow
the Federal Reserve into submission and
also sort of get to a four vote majority
on the board of governors. One dispute
involves Lisa Cook. And incidentally,
we're just days away from Supreme Court
oral argument in the dispute over
whether President Trump's efforts to
terminate Lisa Cook, you know, last year
were legally adequate. Right now, the
courts have kept her in her job. So, he
was not actually able to fire her. Uh,
but he's still moving to do it. And the
Supreme Court's going to weigh in on
whether he can in a matter of days. This
is not a similar action against Pal.
Trump has not at this point attempted to
remove him from office under the
statute. This is an attempt to basically
bully him out of office um using the
Department of Justice, which is a very
different thing. Um you know that his
his liberty is is threatened. You know,
it's not just that he could lose his
job, it's that he could go to jail. And
I can't think of any analog in the
history uh of the US central bank or any
you know US agency to this sort of
action by an administration against a
member of the government an official in
the government.
>> So how should we actually think about
the timing of all of this? Because I
mean you know everyone knows Pal is on
his way out anyway. uh it's not that
long until we're going to have a new Fed
chair. So, the idea of going after him
with a potential criminal proceeding
when, you know, pretty soon he's not
going to be there anyway doesn't
necessarily make much sense in terms of
influencing actual Fed policy. But maybe
it makes a lot of uh sense to your
earlier point about seeking revenge
against people who are perceived to
>> This is about things at once. I think
that's right. It's it's it's like maybe
let's try to tease out some of the
different things that are going on here.
One is that Pal is still serving as
chair and his term runs until May and
Trump has been clear that he would like
to replace Pal as chair and that he has
in fact identified who he wants in that
job. And so on one level, this may be
about getting pal to step down before
May so that he can be replaced, you
know, months earlier. I agree with you.
Uh that doesn't seem like uh
justification for this sort of
escalation on its own. As Joe mentioned
earlier, Pal is also serving a term as
governor. That term runs until 2028.
And if Pal were to choose to stay on the
board, not to resign as governor um when
his chair term expires, that would take
a seat that Trump would otherwise be
able to nominate um someone to fill. And
that is relevant because uh the board at
the beginning of Trump's term had seven
governors on it. And so it was full. And
those governors have 14-year terms that
are staggered every two years designed
to prevent a president from being able
to quickly take control of the board
with their own appointees. Right? It it
it insulates the board from the White
House to have 14-year term governors,
seven of them who uh are only turn over
every two years. But if a lot of those
governors can be induced to resign
early, then the president can put um you
know his or her own people in. And so um
one thing that could be going on here is
an effort to get pal to step down from
his governor's seat. Uh famously Mariner
Eckles who was the chair of the board um
in the 30s and 40s when he was no longer
chair. stayed in his governor's seat and
uh that is unusual but can happen when
the stakes for who's in those seats are
high like they are now. But I also think
it's worth recognizing that there's
something going on that's um um um
bigger than the Fed here. Um that isn't
just sort of this micro politics of you
know Jerome Pal's seat as chair, Jerome
Pal's seat as governor. that's about
Jerome Pal as a highprofile
prominent government official who has
not bent the knee um being made an
example of so that everybody else on the
board of governors and throughout the US
government can see um what could happen
to you if you uh defy the administration
and that's why I feel the stakes for
this are actually quite I and it's about
the larger dynamic of what happens in a
government where people are scared of
the White House.
You right there's a few different things
going on here which is that like you
know you could it's not crazy to think
that we should have a like one could
argue and I'm sure other countries have
this. I don't know about the uh monetary
policy structure in other countries, but
I'm sure other countries have it such
that the chairman of the central bank or
the head of the central bank is directly
accountable to the head of state and can
be fired etc. Like these are reasonable
things to debate about what is the
optimal structure etc. The idea of
criminal charges or the perception which
many people share right now that
criminal charges because you don't like
essentially because someone doesn't like
the job you're doing obviously gets to
an even deeper issue of governance that
would apply in any governmental system
anywhere. One thing I just want to note
poly market has a bet on Jerome Powell
out of the Fed board by the end of the
year that was trading in the mid 80s
last night. That's down to the mid70s
today. So clearly there not a lot of
money on this. It's just sort of an
interesting thing to note that already
there's this maybe this expectation that
he will not just like step away quietly
now as expected. Also Tom Tillis the
Republican on the Senate Banking
Committee already said he's not going to
he's going to block any Fed nominations
at this point. So that's another
impediment to who um whe you know some
other Republicans stand up to Trump on
this whether Trump can get that majority
that he craves. Yeah, I think it's very
unclear um how this is going to play out
at this point. Um Jay Powell is somebody
with allies on Capitol Hill um allies in
the Senate Republican caucus. He is in
fact a Republican. He was in fact
nominated to this job by President Trump
and he could fight this and stay in the
job. Um you know,
it's hard to know. Um and and to some
extent it's a personal choice for him
whether to whether to resign in May or
now or to stay in the job. And it's also
early to tell whether there'll be an
attempted removal of Pal um the way
there was an attempt to remove Lisa
Cook.
[music]
What's the actual status of the Lisa
Cook proceedings? Because this is the
other common thread. There are many
common threads running between the Lisa
Cook action and this potential action
against PAL, which is that Bill Py, the
FHFA director, um is supposedly the sort
of mastermind or um the driving force
perhaps uh between both of these uh not
charges, but well, one is a potential
charge and the other one is potential
firing for uh misconduct.
>> Yeah. So the Cook case is set for oral
argument and you know in a matter of
days from now at the court and then the
court could um issue a decision in that
matter any time um between now and June
at the end of its term and given the
stakes of the case you know often high
stakes cases are decided right at the
very end you know June there's this like
you know period of two weeks when the
Supreme Court you know issues a lot of
important decisions I wouldn't be
shocked if this case was, you know, um,
resolved in June. Uh when the court will
also be considering a case involving
Rebecca Slaughter that was argued in
December about whether there can be any
agencies where the president um only
remove the heads for cause. And it's
expected that the Fed is going to be
carved out from a decision that would
invalidate those provisions in other
statutes. But if the Fed wasn't carved
out and the court decided in that case
to just uh invalidate all of the laws
that limit the president's ability to
remove officials to situations involving
cause, then of course Trump could just
fire everybody on the board without any
reason and that would moot the Lisa Cook
dispute and she would be removed. So
that case is also likely to be decided
in in June. And so those two cases are
sort of those are sort of you know
making their way towards a decision
right now. This has barely begun. Um and
there's no parallel sort of removal
action but it's a criminal proceeding
and so uh it would raise a lot of
different legal issues from those other
two cases. So, according to uh Nick
Timosro at the Wall Street Journal, uh
Jerome Powell had already hired the firm
Williams and Connelly on his own dime.
Paul's a rich guy, successful
businessman, lawyer. He can afford to
hire great lawyers and he's going to
have to defend himself. How does that
work though? like the sort of and just
maybe in general I don't know like in
terms of the expectations of you know if
um if people at the fed are going to be
subject to criminal proceedings or
charges or subpoenas or whatever the
obligation or the incidence of expense
for these uh for these defenses. What
does the law say about who has to pay
for these things?
>> Yeah, the law does not permit the
agencies to to pay for this in any way.
And so the officials are on their own.
The legal staff at the board of
governors cannot represent Pal in a
proceeding um being brought against him
by the Justice Department. They can't
represent him in a removal action by the
president. And so these matters require
you to hire your own counsel. And there
are organizations that um arrange for
lawyers to represent people in these
positions pro bono or we'll pay the
legal fees but it definitely has an
impact on who can you know serve in the
government. This is part of why the
stakes of this are quite high. This is
this sort of thing scares people away
from government service and and leads to
resignations. recall over the summer
that, you know, Governor Cuddler
resigned abruptly and without
explanation 6 months before the end of
her term and I think there's a fair
amount of information in the public
domain now that she was also being
investigated and you know Alvaro Bedoya
for example was a commissioner on the
Federal Trade Commission like Rebecca
Slaughter who was removed by President
Trump in the spring and you know he had
to go out and get another job. And so he
can no longer um sue to be reinstated in
his current job. You know, he can only
sue for damage. Now, uh Rebecca
Slaughter has held out to try to get
reinstated, but it requires her not to
work right now. And like not everybody
can do that. And that's part of the
issue here is when the US federal
government, you know, throws its full
weight against an individual, very few
people can afford personally,
financially to, you know, to fight back.
And so a lot of people are frightened
and and and a lot of people don't stand
up. And and so part of the story here is
all of the sort of bullying that doesn't
have to happen because people, you know,
on their own change their behavior to
avoid drawing the eye of the White
House.
>> Just real quickly, I recall, you know,
of course at the beginning of this term
in office, Trump got these settlement
agreements with major law firms. I
believe Williams and Connelly was not
one of them. But does that create an
additional complication of like people
fearing that they can even get adequate
legal defense in certain situations from
um law firms or from a legal community
that to some extent feels itself under
pressure from the administration?
>> Yeah, absolutely. There's a lot of elite
lawyers that are scared to represent
people who the administration perceives
to be enemies because the administration
has made clear that they will go after
the lawyers who represent those people.
It's not even like uh wink wink na nod.
It's it's pretty explicit. There are a
number of firms that are representing
clients who are in litigation with the
administration and they tend to be firms
that specialize in litigation and
specialize in litigation against the
government. So like a Wilmer Hail is a
firm that represents routinely clients
that are in litigation with the
government. So it's a natural posture
for them to take on uh you know the case
of say an individual um who's in
litigation with the government but firms
that aren't otherwise you know in
litigation with the government um you
know may decline to represent clients
like this altogether and um that is also
a big problem that goes that yeah goes
beyond this specific case. So, Love, I
know you're not sat in front of a
Bloomberg terminal right now, but Joe
and I both are. And
>> I can't afford it. [laughter]
>> And we're recording this uh you know,
early on Monday morning. And the market
reaction has been, you know, negative.
So, we've seen stocks are down. Um
yields are up a little bit. Uh gold has
been rising, but we haven't seen, you
know, panic in the market. Certainly, if
you look at the yield on the long bond,
which is where you would expect a lot of
concerns about central bank independence
to actually show up, it's not, you know,
selling off massively. What do you think
about the market reaction at this point?
Or let me phrase it another way. Even
though we've now had, you know,
basically a year of concerns about
central bank independence and the idea
that Trump is going to push for lower
interest rates at a time when perhaps
they're not warranted, the market's kind
of been shrugging, right? We haven't
seen a huge reaction in things like tips
and stuff like that. What's going on
here? What accounts for maybe the
disconnect between some of the
commentary which is very worried about
the future direction of independence
versus the actual short-term market
action.
I think that the way the market prices
this sort of potential
nonlinearity
sort of regime change in our you know
monetary and financial architecture is
it's it's a bit like what they say about
bankruptcy. It happened gradually and
then suddenly. I think that as long as
the board
continues to in fact be controlled by
non-Trump appointees,
you're not going to see a lot of market
pricing reaction. But if and when we we
could reach a sort of tipping point
where there's a sort of rapid and
dramatic negative reaction. I don't know
that we will reach that. you know, it
felt like we might have been approaching
one over the summer leading up to the
Cook um firing and then there was a real
step back from that by the
administration. But I think we're still
several seats on the board away from the
market seriously considering
uh and pricing in a central bank that
engages in sort of uh an inflation
taxbased policy or monetary financing
or something like that. I also think
that there's a lot of issues being
raised right now that this policy is
about that aren't really related to
value of the dollar and the
excessiveness or appropriateness of the
uh monetary policy stance. The central
bank is a very powerful organization
that carries out a lot of other
responsibilities which could potentially
be weaponized,
you know, by a board in control of the
White House that would have no effect on
the value of the dollar. um you know uh
the whole payments system the sort of
financial infrastructure backbone runs
through the Federal Reserve and putting
that infrastructure in the hands of an
actor that's willing to abuse it is very
very dangerous but isn't going to change
the value of the dollar and so you know
not everything that happens with respect
to the Fed we should like you know
calibrate how concerned we are based on
whether we're seeing you know the long
bonds move
>> setting aside precedent or whatever you
know I think you could make a really
good argument that the monetary
functions of the Federal Reserve, the
FOMC, the rate setting committee, that's
under the purview of Congress, this is
the power to coin money in a different
version. It's quasi fiscal in nature,
especially when there's targeted direct
lending programs, etc. On the other
hand, you know, I think you could the
supervisory stuff you'd say, well, this
is executive branch stuff. This is about
enforcement of the law, etc. How is it
done like can are the how interlin I
think actually did a lot of your work
how interlin are these two functions the
uh the uh supervisory stuff and the
monetary policy setting such that the
fed can't really be cleanly described as
belonging to one of those two branches
of government
>> is a very deep question. My view on this
is that monetary policy is bank
regulation and vice versa.
That the money supply in the 21st
century is created by investorowned
banks JP Morgan, Bank of America.
They're the ones actually issuing the
money in circulation that people are
using. And it's their expansion of the
money supply or contraction that is
affecting the rate of inflation and all
of the macroeconomic
variables. What the Federal Reserve is
doing when it conducts monetary policy
is changing the incentives and
constraints on the collective balance
sheet of the banking system to expand
and contract. And the main way we adjust
those constraints is through the
overnight interest rate. But the
overnight interest rate itself is not
what's important. It's about the
decisions of JP Morgan and Bank of
America loan officers to expand or
contract um the amount of deposits in
circulation. And there are a lot of
other government tools that affect that.
And we have chosen for good reasons to
focus on the overnight interest rate as
the primary tool for adjusting the rate
of expansion um and contraction of the
money supply. But obviously capital
requirements, liquidity requirements,
supervisory expectations all have an
influence on the the balance sheet of
the banking system and the rate at which
it expands and contracts. And so the
idea that we could um split these
functions and that we would just have
this bank regulator that isn't you know
affecting macroeconomic conditions is
fanciful. We might hope [snorts] to
create a bank regulator that is um not
adjusting its regulatory and supervisory
posture in an effort to influence
macroeconomic conditions. and that that
mandate sits only with an overnight
interest rate authority. But we we would
have to recognize that this other
organization that has the regulatory and
supervisory responsibilities could
perhaps even more effectively influence
uh you know macroeconomic conditions by
adjusting its posture. And certainly in
this sort of environment where we're
trying to um insulate from executive
influence
um the rate of expansion of the money
supply. Um you would not achieve that if
you handed over to the White House
regulatory and supervisory policy uh and
left in an independent agency just the
overnight interest rate policy. Uh you'd
have quite a struggle between those two
[music] bodies. There's a lot of other
issues with splitting them up. But I
think the sort of the bottom line point
is the money supply is bank issued.
[music] So bank regulators are
fundamentally involved in monetary
policy broadly construed no matter no
matter [music] which way you slice it.
>> All right, Lev, we could probably talk
to you about this for a few more hours,
but we're going to have to leave it
there just cuz we want to get this
episode [music] out as soon as possible.
But thank you so much for coming back on
All Thoughts. Really appreciate it.
>> Thank you for having me back.
>> [music]
>> Joe, that was such an interesting
discussion. Obviously, there's the sort
of short-term developments of what will
and won't happen right now, but also, I
guess, the long-term meditations on the
relationship between the Fed and the US
government, the federal government, I
find very interesting. as well. And it
is true, you know, in an in a high
interest rate environment, interest rate
payments become a huge huge chunk of the
federal government's spending. And so
interest rates become much more of a
constraint on what the US government can
and actually cannot do. And so to some
extent, I guess I guess it's
unsurprising that Trump would go after
this as a limiting factor. um he what he
feels as a limiting factor on his own
actions. We know that Trump doesn't like
to feel limited in any way. But on the
other hand, you know, I guess the ad
hocness of it all feels very very
strange and chaotic.
>> Totally. I mean, I think the thing that
really strikes me is that look, there's
no separation of, you know, we could all
accept, including people at the White
House, that, oh, the interest rate
setting is an independent function and
you can't fire the Fed chair and this is
not part of the executive branch. They
could do whatever they want. This could
all be accepted by everyone. But when
you bring in the thought of prison time,
which let's be honest, that's what
that's what a, you know, potential
criminal charge is, I mean, then you're
you're striking at something much deeper
than just, well, what do the court say
about where the Fed sits within the
three branches of government, right? I
mean, then you're you're really into
you're into some new territory here,
>> right? And also, I mean, we talked about
it, but the idea that people are going
to have to pay their own legal fees for
all of this is going to have a massive
chilling effect on anyone um who's even
thinking about going into public office
at this point. And I don't know, you
know, how you kind of fix that.
>> I'm always disturbed by, you know, like
I'll meet very impressive people from
time to time. They're very charismatic
and they have interesting thoughts about
policy and I'm like, "Hey, you ever
thought about running for office?" And
no one ever says yes. Like no sane
person. Seriously, do you like can you
think of a sane person you know that
would subject themselves to public
office right now of any sort?
>> No. I mean this is the classic problem
with public office is everyone who's in
it shouldn't be right. That's the
[laughter] cliche.
>> Yeah. It's just like you'd be so crazy
to it'd be so crazy setting aside going
to prison just like no one I know who
has a two brain cells. No, that's a
little bit unfair. three brain cells
would like think like, oh yeah, I really
want to run for office right now. Like
we are truly selecting for you have to
be a real sociopath basically and I
don't know that a government of
sociopaths is going to lead to optimal
policy.
>> Okay. Well, on that very fun note, shall
we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest Lev
Manand. He's live manand. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman, Dashel Bennett at D-Bot, and
Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlot.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we run these emergency episodes,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform.
[music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely [music] adree. All
you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]
>> [music]